New blog post "Debugging ROOT scripts in Eclipse IDE" (#703)
root-project/web: blog/_posts/2021-10-30-debuging-root-scripts-in-eclipse.md

---
title: "Debugging CERN ROOT scripts and ROOT-based programs in Eclipse IDE"
layout: archive
author: Petr Stepanov
---

<center>
{% include figure_image
   img="/assets/images/setup-eclipse-ide-with-cern-root.jpg"
   style="width: 300px"
%}
</center>

> A question about debugging ROOT scripts now and then arises in the ROOT community. I believe, many ROOT users experienced this unpleasant feeling when your ROOT script crashes with a SEGFAULT without leaving no stack trace in the output whatsoever. CERN ROOT is a framework and it does not provide an out-of-the-box solution for debugging ROOT scripts. Therefore, a programmer may spend quite a time trying to find that piece of code that leads to a crash. Without proper development tools, we are forced to use `cout`s and `TObject::Print()` methods.

Author: You are right. I just looked up - ROOT compiles with -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=RelWithDebInfo [by default](https://root.cern/install/build_from_source/#relevant-cmake-variables). Therefore, standard ROOT binaries contain some debug information. I did not know that.

## Generating Eclipse Project

Technically it is possible to invoke a debugger directly to the ROOT Cling interpreter. In my opinion, this approach is **rather confusing**, especially for a newcomer. 

* Debug entry point will be outside of your program scope, namely in `rmain.cxx`.
* Your script C++ file is never compiled. Program flow is passed to the interpreter that reads and processes your file line-by-line. Therefore, **breakpoints set in your actual source C++ file will never fire up**.

A more straightforward solution would be **turning our ROOT script into a standalone ROOT-based C++ program** with `main()` function. This will ensure the correct entry point and provide an **intuitive debugging flow**. A template repository containing a ROOT-based program code and `CMakeLists.txt` configuration file ready for debugging is [hosted on my GitHub](https://github.com/petrstepanov/root-eclipse). Check out the repository in the desired location on your computer. For instance, we download it into `~/Development` folder.

```
mkdir -p ~/Development && cd ~/Development
git clone https://github.com/petrstepanov/root-eclipse

> ```

Author: Hmm.. but that is a whole point of this topic. The legitimate way of debugging a ROOT script is basically transforming it into (or making it a part of) a ROOT-based standalone program. This is a whole point of the post.

> ```

Reviewer: FYI https://github.com/root-project/root/pull/7714 will introduce debug symbols for interpreted code!

<center>
{% include figure_image
   img="/assets/images/eclipse-folder-structure.png"
   style="width: 100%"
   caption="Project structure outlined graphically."
%}
</center>

Finally open Eclipse and go to File > Open Projects from File System... Specify the project location in the modal dialog by clicking the "Directory..." button. Locate the `~/Development/root-eclipse-project` project folder. Click "Finish".

<center>
{% include figure_image
   img="/assets/images/eclipse-01-open-project.png"
   style="width: 100%"
   caption="Open project generated by the CMake generator in Eclipse IDE."
%}
</center>

Eclipse will automatically start indexing the project. Please kill this process because Eclipse will refresh the workspace and re-index all projects again after the first launch of a Debug configuration.

<center>
{% include figure_image
   img="/assets/images/eclipse-02-stop-indexer.png"
   style="width: 100%"

>    caption="Stop indexing operation. Inexer will restart after the Debug configuration is created."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   caption="Stop indexing operation. The indexer will restart after the Debug configuration is created."
```

2. In the menu "Run" open "Debug configurations". Right-click "C/C++ Application" and select "New Configuration".
3. Click "Browse" next to the "Project" field. Select "root-eclipse-Debug@eclipse" in the modal dialog.
4. Click "Search Project" next to the "C/C++ Application" field. Specify the "root-eclipse" executable built earlier.

<center>
{% include figure_image
   img="/assets/images/eclipse-04-debug-configuration.png"
   style="width: 100%"
   caption="Set up a new Debug configuration."
%}
</center>

Finally, we can run the project in Debug mode. In Eclipse menu select `Run → Debug`. Eclipse will run the project and simultaneously start indexing all ROOT source files. Depending on the speed of your hard drive and memory indexing will require from several minutes to about one hour. 

## Debugging Your Personal Script

Now that our template project is set up and built, we integrate your ROOT script into it. Copy your ROOT script code and place it in the `yourRootScritCode()` function in the `src/main.cpp`.

For the build to succeed, we need to ensure a few more criteria:

> * As opposed to running your ROOT script with CLing interpreter, standalone build requires to include headers `#include <...>` to be explicitly defined in the `src/main.cpp` file for every class used in the program.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* As opposed to running your ROOT script with Cling interpreter, standalone build requires to include headers `#include <...>` to be explicitly defined in the `src/main.cpp` file for every class used in the program.
```

---
title: "Debugging CERN ROOT scripts and ROOT-based programs in Eclipse IDE"
layout: archive
author: Petr Stepanov
---

<center>
{% include figure_image
   img="/assets/images/setup-eclipse-ide-with-cern-root.jpg"
   style="width: 300px"
%}
</center>

CERN ROOT is a rather complex object-oriented framework. It is written in C++, a language with complete manual control over the memory. Therefore, execution of your your ROOT script may sometimes lead to a crash providing minimal information in the stack trace. CERN ROOT is just a framework and it does not provide any out-of-the-box solutions for debugging ROOT scripts. Hence, a question about debugging ROOT scripts now and then arises in the ROOT community. 

> In this blog post, I will share my experience with debugging CERN ROOT scripts and ROOT-based programs. We will utilize Eclipse CDT (C/C++ Development Tooling) Integrated Desktop Environment (IDE), a free software. Eclipse coupled with the GNU Debugger (GDB) provides enhanced code development infrastructure that includes code highlighting, easy navigation between C++ sources and headers, debugging your script as well as ROOT source code, and many more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this blog post, I will share my experience with debugging ROOT scripts and ROOT-based programs. We will utilize Eclipse CDT (C/C++ Development Tooling) Integrated Desktop Environment (IDE), a free software. Eclipse coupled with the GNU Debugger (GDB) provides enhanced code development infrastructure that includes code highlighting, easy navigation between C++ sources and headers, debugging your script as well as ROOT source code, and many more.
```

In general we prefer "ROOT" over "CERN ROOT", given that CERN is not the only contributor to ROOT.

> A few words about the operating system (OS). In this post, I will use Linux-based OS as a system of choice. The same process applies to macOS, but may require a code signing procedure. On Windows, a minGW installation is a prerequisite.

Reviewer: Will a minGW installation help with Eclipse-debugging of MSVC-compiled ROOT? If not, maybe just remove the Windows part, or say "Windows is a different story"? :-)

* Prevent workspace refreshes. In Window > Preferences > General > Workspace, uncheck "Refresh on access". Eclipse may randomly start refreshing the workspace upon the first run of a new Run/Debug configuration. Workspace refresh triggers the restart of an indexer. Additionally, for a CMake-managed project (not CDT managed) folder-specific Refresh Policy settings are unavailable. Our CMake project will refresh all the sources including ROOT sources (if attached). This is an expensive operation that usually takes quite some time. We want to prevent this from happening.

Last but not least, it is useful to turn on the indication of the current heap size used by Eclipse. This can be done in Window > Preferences > General > Show heap status. The heap size will be displayed in the status bar. If heap usage maxes out, increase it accordingly and restart Eclipse.

## Generating Eclipse Project

Technically it is possible to attach a debugger directly to the ROOT Cling interpreter `root.exe`. In my opinion, this approach is **rather confusing**, especially for a newcomer:

* Debug entry point will be outside of your program scope, namely in `rmain.cxx`.

> * Your script C++ file is never compiled. Program flow is passed to the interpreter that reads and processes your file line-by-line. Therefore, **breakpoints set in your actual source C++ file will never fire up**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Your script C++ file is just-in-time compiled. Work is currently [ongoing](https://github.com/root-project/root/pull/7714) to support the debugging scripts.
```

> A more straightforward solution would be **turning our ROOT script into a standalone ROOT-based C++ program** with `main()` function. This will ensure the correct entry point and provide an **intuitive debugging flow**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A alternative and robust solution is to **turn our ROOT script into a standalone ROOT-based C++ program** with `main()` function. This will ensure the correct entry point and provide an **intuitive debugging flow**.
```

Next we will discuss an alternative option. You don't have a CMake based project and want to use my Template GitHub project. Then your ROOT script needs to be properly integrated into the existing project. Generally speaking, this involves following:

* Specify extra libraries you are utilizing in project's `CMakeLists.txt`.
* Explicitly defne all the headers used in your script (Cling does not require that).
* Indicate certain class names in project's `LinkDef.h` file for the proper dictionary and shared library generation.

A detailed instrutions elaborating each item above can be found in my Template GitHub Project's [readme file](https://github.com/petrstepanov/root-eclipse#debugging-your-personal-script).

Now we are ready to debug your ROOT script. Save changes in all modified source files. In Eclipse menu select Project > Build All (or run the `all` target under the Build Targets in the "Project Explorer" window). Finally, to start debugging run the previously created debug configuration in Run > Debug menu item.

> ## RAMDISK for Older Computers

Reviewer: Is there a way to exclude `interpreter/llvm` from indexing?

Author: Thank you, I updated the Makefile to exclude the `interpreter/llvm` folder.

On modern computers with NVMe hard drives Eclipse indexer will crawl ROOT sources fairly quickly. However, the indexing process can take about one hour on older computers SATA3 interface or magnetic disk drives (HDD). Please refer to the [RAMDISK section here](https://github.com/petrstepanov/root-eclipse#ramdisk-for-older-computers) if you are interested in improving your indexing speed.

## Summary

In this post, we learned how to set up and apply Eclipse IDE software for in-depth debugging of the CERN ROOT scripts. It was a process, so let's draw a line and summarize what we learned today:

* Touched base about compiling ROOT with debug symbols.
* Learned how to install and tweak the Eclipse IDE for the development of a ROOT-based program.

> * Investigated how to convert a ROOT script into an standalone ROOT-based program with CMake configuration file ().

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Investigated how to convert a ROOT script into an standalone ROOT-based program with CMake configuration file.
```

* Used a CMake generator to set up Eclipse project. A one-liner command automatically discovers ROOT headers, shared libraries, attaches ROOT sources and creates ready to go project.
* Got familiar with Eclipse IDE user interface. We built the project, created and run the Debug configurations.

I hope you enjoyed this technical note. If not yet familiar, you can now continue learning fundamental Eclipse CDT hotkeys and debugging capabilities [on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=eclispe+cdt+debug). 

> Good luck with your projects! Feel free to [reach out to me](https://petrstepanov.com/) if you have any questions or recommendations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Good luck with your projects! Feel free to leave comments below if you have any questions or recommendations.
```
